# Mining
In TerrafirmaGreg, mining is unbelievably dangerous. Rocks can cave-in, and monsters or hazarduos materials can easily kill you. Also, many kinds of tools that can mine ores may frustrate you. In this section, you'll get to know how to deal with all those disasters, with collecting significantly more resources.

## Locating Veins
Ores are found in veins. Veins can be found with the help of indicators: such as a small copper ore, rock pile of tungstate, etc. Indicators guarantee that there is an ore vein of it directly underneath it.

Finding those indicators are rather easy: just run around the ground. However, some veins need a depth, meaning no indicators will spawn on the ground. This demands you to travel through a cave, which is full of monsters. Though, you don't have to go that deep until late LV. Also, a prospector's pick will help you a bit, while an ore prospector in LV will substitute it.

## Supporting and Cave-ins
Although you might want to dig all the ores you've found, you should know the rocks above your head can collapse. A cave-in is undoubtedly dangerous, for rocks above your head will just fall and squash you.

There is a chance for a cave-in if…
1. You break a raw rock.
2. An unsupported rock is nearby(the range is quite broad).

The term *unsupported* means that a rock is airborne, without any blocks that could defy gravity underneath it. For example, a rock on a cobblestone is unsupported, because a cobblestone gets affected by gravity. If it were a wood plank, which does not fall by itself, the rock would have been supported. Also, support beams can make any blocks supported within their range, though it cannot block already falling blocks.

These conditions suggest many things. As the first condition says, cave-ins are activated only if a rock is broken; it does not matter to make supported rocks unsupported, like removing support beams or planks underneath them. Also, cave-ins can be completely prevented by covering the cave, so that cobblestones cannot fall onto you. Moreover, digging straight down will be safe in the most cases, as it won't make any rocks airborne.

Even though you trigger a cave-in, it is just a small chance, which is low enough to break three rocks horizontally. The fact that you can safely break three rocks is important because it is the minimum area you need to place support beams for preventing cave-ins.

## Support Beams
Support beams are the cheapest way to support blocks. They are made by crafting 2 logs with a saw. 2 logs will give 8 support beams.

Any horizontal support beams will support 9x5x9 area. The range of 9x5x9 can be interpreted as it supporting 4 blocks each in left, right, front, and back, and 2 blocks up and down in y axis. Horizontal support beams however cannot be put independently; it requires any vertical support beams which are 1 to 5 blocks apart. Placing a support beam in between the vertical support beams will automatically form horizontal support beams.

As mentioned earlier, it's safe to remove and replace support beams, given that you don't break any rocks without them.

## Mining Tools
There are 3 different mining tools for now. The first and the most useful one is a hammer. A hammer is a pretty good mining tools by increasing the amount of resources you get. In most cases like mining metals, you are going to use it. You will get 1 or 2 crushed ore dusts when mining with a hammer, which can be processed into a whole dust of 144mB.

The next one is a pickaxe. The reason why I introduce a pickaxe second is because it yields a raw ore with a small chance of a rock dust, not a crushed ore. A raw ore itself dos not give you much resource; it is just a bit better than the small ores you may picked up on the ground. Making a raw ore into a crushed dust requires either a forge hammer, macerator, or crushing wheels. Also, andesite rock dust are hazardous, meaning that you should mine andesite ores with a hammer so that you don't get any rock dusts. However, it still has a use: coal. Although coal dusts can be used for the fuel of solid boiler, coal is more useful in many ways and can be improved further with a coke oven. Except for that, most of ores are better off being mined with a hammer.

The third one is a mining hammer. This works as a pickaxe, except for it breaks 3x3 area at once. This will greatly improve the speed with which you mine, in the expense of requiring some ore processing. Having a mining hammer requires a double ingot and forging. There also exists a spade, which is merely a shovel version of a mining hammer.

## Hazardous Materials
Some materials are *hazardous* in this modpack. When a hazardous material is in your inventory, you will be inflicted with 10 senconds of poison effect, which is renewed unless you drop them. It is extremely harmful, being enough to kill you easily in the early game.

Hazardous materials show itself with a red HAZARDOUS warning. These include: andesite dust, arsenic(including realgar, cobaltite), beryllium, mercury(including cinnabar).

To deal with hazardous materials, fill up your inventory and go onto the material. Then, open up any container with enough spaces, and spam shift-click. This will put the items you want while minimizing the time it is in your inventory. A backpack will help this a lot.