# The Copper Age
In the copper age, you can do many advanced things like making crafting tables, wood chests, etc. Funny enough, the most basic things in vanilla Minecraft are somewhat advanced in here.

## [Casting](../../in-depth-topics/tfc-basics/20250308173354.md#casting)
Cast tool heads by putting 9 or more small copper into a vessel, heating up the vessel, opening it, and putting the tool head molds into it. Alternatively, put appropriate amount of small copper in the left side of charcoal forge and tool head molds in right, and start a fire.

The first material to make tools would be copper. There must have been some copper ores during the travel, in the form of native copper, tetrahedrite, or malachite. If you haven't find one, go find it.

There's an option to make bronze by [alloying](./20250310171342.md#alloying-bronze) copper and tin. While it might be frustrating, it is recommended to jump directly to the bronze age, while it doesn't mean that it's good to skip the following sections in here.

9 small ores(16mB) translate into 1 ingot/tool(144mB). You will need at least 14 copper ingots for a copper anvil, which is necessary for progression in the primitive age. Even if you start right away from bronze tools, this requirement will not be removed.

The first tool you should make is a saw. Don't make pickaxe! You cannot mine anything without a saw, because of the cave-ins. Moreover, it is better to mine materials with a hammer, which yields almost 7 times much.

## Crafting Table
Make a crafting table by crafting any 4 logs with a saw for 16 wood lumbers, combining them into 4 wood planks, and again combining them.

This section is a portal to tons of things unlocked including:
* Animal Husbandary
* Barrels: leather making, aged alcohol giving potion buffs
* Beekeeping: sweet, sweet foods
* Chest: finally a proper storage is here
* Dairy Foods: a special nutrient for higher hp
* Glassworking: not interesting, while necessary
* Leather Making: bellow is necessary, leather flask which contains water
* Mining with support beams: keep safe from cave-ins with support beams!
* Sandwiches: condense foods, be healthy
* Wool Bed: we need a comfortable bed

... and more!

## Tier 0: Stone Anvil, Tier I: Copper Anvil
Make a stone anvil by right-clicking any raw igneous extrusive rock with a stone hammer, and make a copper anvil with 7 double copper ingots. You'll need flux for welding by crafting fluxstones[^1] with a hammer.

An [anvil](../../in-depth-topics/primitive-age/20250310130131.md) is a crafting station for welding and forging. Welding is to attach two things for making double ingots/plates or complex items. Forging is for making tools, which will be covered in the link above. A welding recipe reuiqres flux. Every tool after bronze one must be made in the same or higher tier of anvil, for there's no casting molds for tools anymore. This means that everytime you get better materials in the primitive age, you are going to repeat these steps.

To get a first anvil, grab a raw igneous extrusive rock. Raw rocks can be extracted by isolating the rock from any other nearby rocks. Place it down anywhere you want, and right click with a hammer. You now have a stone anvil!

Stone anvil unlocks double copper ingots. Heat up 14 copper ingots until it is able to be welded (Orange *** is recommended). Put two ingots and enough flux in anvil. Right-click the anvil with hammer while crouching, and you'll get a double copper ingot! Repeat this until you have 7 double copper ingots. Place them on crafting table in a I shape, and now you have the first metal anvil!

[^1]: Marble, Dolomite, Chalk, Claystone, and any other once-lived organisms.
