# The Steel Age
Things are getting useful, pretty robust, fast with steel. Also, the whole new world into Gregtech and Create finally begins. Though, more time grinding is wating for you.

## Blast Furnace and Processing Steels
Build and run a blast furnace. You'll need 2 bellows, 2 crucibles, 4 fire clay bricks, 9 double wrought iron plates, and 12 wrought iron plates. Additionally, prepare decent ferrous items as you have done for processing wrought irons, and equivalent amount of flux and charcoal for processing steels.

A blast furnace is a steel processing chamber as bloomery was a wrought iron processing one. It is also a kind of a multiblock, consisting of the block itself and fire bricks chimney lined with wrought iron plates. The blast furnace block is made by 8 double wrought iron plates surrounding a crucible in a crafting table. On top of that, place 4 fire bricks surrounding the 4 sides of the blast furnace block above. Line them with wrought iron plates by shift-clicking on them. If done properly, the gauge will appear.

While that forms the multiblock, it is not enough to run it. You'll need a crucible on firepit , 2 bellows, and a tuyere. A crucible is for containing liquid pig irons, which will be cast into ingots and forged in anvil. 2 bellows go for a blast process block and crucible. They are for keeping liquid pig iron molten, because steel processing requires as hot as brilliant white. A tuyere is a pipe which goes into the blast furnace block, to pump liquid pig iron into the block under it. It has a durability, which decreases every time liquid pig iron is pumped or the blast furnace is heated up.

To run a blast furnace, throw some ferrous items with equivalent amount of flux and charcoal, as you have done with a bloomery. After that, start a fire on the blast furnace block. Unlike bloomery, you have to keep it hot enough by repeatedly using a bellow, and you can put more fuel while it's running. After the ferrous items you have put are all molten, liquid pig iron will go down into the crucible. Then simply cast pig iron ingots, keeping it mind that the crucible also needs good temperature.

Pig iron ingots are by itself not a steel (it's name is different, right?). To make them a usable steel, you have to process them twice, as you have done with blooms. Forging requires some temperature, but not as high as brilliant white, at which they will go liquid and mess up everything. Forging pig iron ingots make them a high carbon steel ingots, which you forge into steel ingots.

## Tier IV: Steel Anvil
Make a steel anvil with 7 double steel ingots.

Now, you are officially done with *The Primitive Age*. Go to the mechanical/steam age and explore the whole new world!