# The Wrought Iron Age
Here we begins *real* Terrafirmacraft. You'll start to grind some of your precious time with anvil, since you cannot cast any items from now on. So make sure you are familiar with using anvil.

## Bloomery and Processing Blooms
Make a bloomery and get at least 70 wrought iron ingots to progress. You'll need 32 bronze ingots and 21 any type of stones except for cobblestones to form a bloomery. After forming one, put 25 iron-giving dusts(one of hematite, limonite, magnetite and able to be mixed) and 22 charcoal, or 24 iron dusts and 24 charcoal for your first wrought iron to run it. You may have to run for 3-4 times.

A bloomery is a station of making wrought iron. It is made up of 8 double bronze plates. Each double plate costs 2 plates, each costing a double ingot which is made with 2 ingots, so you need 32 bronze ingots to make one. It is a kind of multiblock, requiring 21 stone blocks for its maximum efficiency. Take a look at multiblock info in JEI.

To use bloomery, put items that melt into cast iron(or just iron) with charcoal. The amount you can put in is 16 initially, and can be increased by 16 with extended chimney up to twice, making the maximum capacity of 48. For every 144mB of cast iron and 1 charcoal, 1 bloom will form. Any excess iron or charcoal will be thrown out, so make sure you calcualted it correctly. When the items are registered, molten blocks will form inside the bloomery. Use a firestick on the bloomery door to run it, and wait 15 minutes. After 15 minutes, you can get blooms inside the bloomery by mining them. They are very hot, as hot as Brillinat White, so grab a blowpipe in your offhand.

Blooms need to be forged twice. Forging a bloom will output a refined bloom, and forging it will finally give you a wrought iron ingot. If they are not hot enough, put them in charcoal forge or a crucible to keep their temperature. But never reach to the temperature of Brilliant White: it will make them into cast iron, with which you cannot make any tools.

If you have put wrong items in bloomery, just break the bloomery door. The molten blocks will turn back into items.

Now you know everything to have a wrought iron ingot, but why is it this complicated? It is because a normal(or cast) iron ingot is of too high carbon concentration, to the degree that it is unusable for any tools. Though this doesn't mean that cast iron is not useful; you are going to have tin alloy which is made up of cast iron, and it is consistently used further.

## Tier III: Wrought Iron Anvil
Make a wrought iron anvil with 7 double wrought iron ingots.

A wrought iron anvil finally unlocks iron tools with other many things including:
* Low Pressure Steam Boiler: make one just for the questbook, yet not useful
* Glider: it's great view from up here
* Grills: firepit with 5 slots, with food preservation buff
* Wooden Crate: did you miss the vanila chest?

As mentioned earlier, every time you get a better resource, make an anvil made up of it.