# The Stone Age
The stone age is where everything begins. You'll get some basic stone tools, clay items in here.

## [Stone Tools](../primitive-age/20250306153529.md)
Make stone axe and knife.

To make stone tools, pick up some wood sticks and stones fallen around. Make stone tool heads by [knapping](../tfc-basics/20250308173354.md#knapping), which can be done by right-clicking while holding two or more rocks, and craft them with sticks to get stone tools. Stone axe is for chopping a tree, and stone knife is for gathering thatch, which is used for pit kiln.

With those tool heads, place them vertically to make stone tools. Congratulations! You now have a fundamental tools to start.

If you are interested, take a look at:
* [farming](../primitive-age/20250307010726.md): good diet, good life; harvest some papyrus for paper
* [thatch bed](../primitive-age/20250307015405.md#thatch-bed): you may not want to memorize how to go home from the world spawn

## Tree Chopping
Get some logs and sticks with stone axe.

This section is for letting you know that there are two styles to chop a tree: Gregtech and Terrafermacraft style.

* Gregtech style
    * Condition: break a log attached to leaves while not crouching
    * Time: determined by the number of logs vertically attached
    * Durability Cost: 1
    * Output: logs, sticks, tree saplings
* Terrafirmacraft style
    * Condition: break a log while crouching, or break a log not attached to leaves
    * Time: about 5 seconds
    * Durability Cost: the amount of logs you get
    * Output: logs only

You can extend a tree by placing the same type of log beside a tree. This will cut the time it takes by a fifth while activationg the Gregtech style.

Tree logs will be used for firpit, pit kiln, charcoal pit, and more.

After you get more than 16 logs, I recommend you to search for [kaolin clay](../primitive-age/20250308163610.md#kaolinite-powder) before you choose where to live. By right-clicking onto a block with a log while crouching, you can stack up to 16 logs in a single block. The stack is called a log pile, which will help you a lot as a temporary block. Kaolin clay is not only a required material to advance into the steel age, but also helps in early-game for alloying. You'll need about 1500 kaolin clays[^1] would work for your entire gameplay.

## Starting a Fire
Make a [firestarter](./20250309022123.md#Firestarter) by crafting two sticks diagonally. Anytime you need to heat things up, you are going to use this. It will be used until the steel age where you can get flint-and-steel.

## Charcoal Pit
Make characoal pit by placing 144 logs in a 3x3 block, light them up, and cover them with dirt.

Setting up a fire on log piles while they cannot access to open air makes them charcoal. This structure is called charcoal pit. The simplest shape of charcoal pit would be a log pile in a hole with dirt covered, and common shape would be a 3x3 square. It takes 15 minutes to finish, and gives you roughly ⅓ charcoal per log in return.

Charcoal is a pretty good fuel and a essential material for making wrought irons. Also, charcoal forge, a better way to heat items, is made up of charcoal, as its name suggests.

## [The First Pottery](../primitive-age/20250308175403.md)
Make unfired small vessel, water pot, saw blade mold, ingot mold, and ceramic blowpipe by knapping.

Clay is found under specific types of flowers[^2]. Dig them with shovel you've crafted earlier. After getting clay, knap them. Clay knapping recipe is similar to inverted stone knapping recipe, with some added tools. It costs 5 clay per recipe and does not consume clay even if you fail to make one.

A vessel is a small storage for things. It has 4 slots to put, each capped by 16 items. It is used for metling down some ores, or preserving foods so that they go bad slowly. A water pot contains enough water to drink once. This will save tons of time finding water or even dying from dehydration. Molds are for making advanced tools, such as copper or something. They are going to be used until the bronze age. A ceramic blowpipe protects you from harmful effects, mainly damage from holding too hot items. It has no durability, so earlier, the better. It is also used for glassworking, but the most usage is the one said earlier.

Additionally, you may make either a hammer or a pickaxe mold. They both can be used for mining stones and ores. But don't rush! A hammer can be made from a stone, and it can be used instead of pickaxe. Making ore-level hammer or pickaxe is okay to be delayed until you make an anvil, which gives you a buff in durability and mining speed. It's your choice to make a hammer for durability, since a stone hammer has too small durability of 50.

You might notice that the items you've just made are unfired. In order to use them, you should heat them up to Yellow White.

## [Pit Kiln](../primitive-age/20250309022123.md#pit-kiln)
Using pit kiln, heat up items you've made in the previous section.

Pit kiln is made up of 8 thatch, which can be acquired by breaking grass with a knife, and 8 logs. Place down up to four items in a hole, put 8 thatch, put 8 logs, and start a fire. After 8 minutes, items will be heated up to Yellow White ****.

Now that you have vessels, you are ready to get into the copper age.

[^1]: It is equivalent to 23.48 sets(=64).
[^2]: Those are Athyrium, Canna, Goldenrod, Pampas Grass, Perovskia, and Water Canna.