# Special Recipes
There are tons of added ways to craft things. In here, we'll take a glance at what kind of new ways exists.

## Knapping
Knapping is a special way of shaping things. Holding enough amount of a specific material, right click and knapping UI will appear. In 5x5 knapping UI, you click cells you want to be removed. Failing to make an item will lose the original material, except for clay.

There are four cases in which you knap: stone, clay, leather, and horn. The first two is the most important part of knapping. You can navigate through all the recipes in JEI.

## Casting
Casting is a process of putting liquid into molds. Before the wrought iron age, you can cast tools directly. But from the wrought iron age, you can only cast liquid into ingots, requiring forging.

There are multiple ways for casting. With a vessel with molten ore, right-click it and casting UI will be shown. In charcoal forge, molten ore will directly go to the container in the right side. A crucible works like charcoal forge, with more smelting slots and one casting slot.

## Instant Barrel / Barrel Sealing
A [barrel](../primitive-age/20250309014151.md) is an item for making a few items. The right-hand slot is where the items go in, and with appropriate liquid and item, the result will be given. There's no worry for losing items: it has invisible slots for excess items. You can retreive all the outputs from the right-hand slot.

Some recipes are instant, like forming limewater with flux, while most of the recipes require some time to be done. Recipes that are not instant require the barrel to be sealed. Otherwise the recipe will not work.