# The Primitive Age
If you don't want to rumble with any complicated things, here will be the best place to start.

In here, you'll get procedural goals for advancement and brief explanation for what to do. To make things simple, most of the recipes you need are introduced in the form of link, so don't hesitate to navigate through links. The section is made to follow step by step.

The primitive age consists of 6 sub-ages: the copper age, bronze age, wrought iron age, steel age, black steel age, and finally, colored steel age[^1]. When you reach to the steel age, you'll move to the mechanical/steam age. From that point, your progression will be made in parallel.

## [Basic Health Care](./tfc-basics/20250306152451.md)
While there's no problem to skipping the TFC Basics chapter, you should know about fundamentals for survival.

* Health: max health changes according to nutritional balance
* Hunger: requires foods, cannot run and screen gets greish when low
* Hydration: drink fresh water by right-clicking, slow and mining fatigue debuff when low
* Body temperature: triangle indicator over hot bar; red screen when hot, blue screen when low; heatstroke over 30℃, froze to death under 0℃, 15℃ best

Now that you know how to survive, let's start our journey!

## [Stone Tools](./primitive-age/20250306153529.md)
Make stone axe and knife.

To make stone tools, pick up some wood sticks and stones fallen around. Make stone tool heads by [knapping](./tfc-basics/20250308173354.md#knapping), and craft them with sticks to get stone tools. Stone axe is for chopping a tree, and stone knife is for gathering thatch, which is used for pit kiln.

With those tool heads, place them vertically to make stone tools. Congratulations! You now have a fundamental tools to start.

Also, as soon as you've chosen where to live, start [farming](./primitive-age/20250307010726.md) by making a stone hoe. You will need crops for hunger management and animal husbandary.

## [Thatch Bed](./primitive-age/20250307015405.md#thatch-bed)
Create a thatch bed for setting spawnpoint.

A thatch bed allows you to set spawnpoint, while you cannot skip through night.

A wool bed will enable you to skip through night. It requires spindle, saw, and wooly animals with enough familiarity.

## [Kaolin Clay](./primitive-age/20250308163610.md#kaolinite-powder)?
It is strongly recommended to find kaolin clay, or at least where it is, before you make a house.

Before you start your journey, gather more than 16 logs. You can place a log pile by right-clicking while crouching, and this will help you a lot as a temporary block.

Alternatively, about 1500 kaolin clays[^2] would work for your entire gameplay[^3]. The number is just a rough approximation, so more of them for safety would be better.

## Chopping a Tree
Get some logs and sticks with stone axe.

It's good to know that there are two styles to chop a tree: Gregtech and Terrafermacraft style.

* Gregtech style
    * Condition: break a log attached to leaves while not crouching
    * Time: determined by the number of logs vertically attached
    * Durability Cost: 1
    * Output: logs, sticks, tree saplings
* Terrafirmacraft style
    * Condition: break a log while crouching, or break a log not attached to leaves
    * Time: about 5 seconds
    * Durability Cost: the amount of logs you get
    * Output: logs only

Extend a tree by placing the same type of log beside a tree. This will cut the time it takes by a fifth.

Tree logs will be used for firpit, pit kiln, charcoal pit, and more.

## [Clay Items](./primitive-age/20250308175403.md)
Knap unfired small vessel, water pot, saw blade mold, ingot mold, and ceramic blowpipe.

Clay is found under specific types of flowers[^4]. Dig them with shovel you've crafted earlier. After getting clay, knap them. Clay knapping recipe is similar to inverted stone knapping recipe, with some added tools. It costs 5 clay per recipe and does not consume clay even if you fail to make one.

A vessel is a small storage for things. It has 4 slots to put, each capped by 16 items. It is used for metling down some ores, or preserving foods so that they go bad slowly. A water pot contains enough water to drink once. This will save tons of time finding water or even dying from dehydration. Molds are for making advanced tools, such as copper or something. They are going to be used until the bronze age. A ceramic blowpipe protects you from harmful effects, mainly damage from holding too hot items. It has no durability, so earlier, the better. It is also used for glassworking, but the most usage is the one said earlier.

Additionally, you may make either a hammer or a pickaxe mold. They both can be used for mining stones and ores. But don't rush! A hammer can be made from a stone, and it can be used instead of pickaxe. Making ore-level hammer or pickaxe is okay to be delayed until you make an anvil, which gives you a buff in durability and mining speed. It's your choice to make a hammer for durability, since a stone hammer has too small durability of 50.

You might notice that the items you've just made are unfired. In order to use them, you should heat them up to <span style="color:yellow">Yellow White</span>.

## Pit Kiln
Pit Kiln is a way to heat up things directly to Yellow White ****. You need 8 straws and 8 logs, with enough patience to wait 8 minutes. Dig a small one-block hole and place down the items you want to heat up. There is a special key for placing an item on a block. Normally 4 items are maximum. Place 8 straws and 8 logs on top of them, and set on a fire. You may see the remaining time on top of the screen.

## Charcoal Pit
Charcoal pit is a way to get charcoal. Charcoal is a pretty good fuel, also being a required material for making wrought irons. A better version of forge, charcoal forge, is made up of charcoal as its name suggests, too.

By right-clicking onto a block while holding a log and crouching, you can stack up to 16 logs in a single block. The stack is called a log pile. Setting up a fire on log piles while they cannot access to open air makes them charcoal. This step is called charcoal pit. The simplest shape of charcoal pit would be a log pile in a hole with dirt covered, and common shape would be a 3x3 square. It takes 15 minutes to finish, and gives you roughly ⅓ charcoal per log in return.

## Charcoal Forge
Charcoal can be used to form a charcoal forge. Charcoal forge is an improved way to heat up things. You need 5 stone blocks, including cobblestones, raw stones, and stone bricks. Dig a hole and replace 5 blocks surrounding the hole with stones. Place 7 or 8 charcoal into the hole by right-clicking, and set on a fire onto it. You'll now see that the texture has been changed like a magma block.

Opening the charcoal forge by right-clicking, you'll see there are 10 slots in V shape and 4 slots on the right side vertically. The 10 slots are for items to heat up and fuels, 5 each. Side 4 slots are for containers like vessels, molds, etc. Put 2 or more ingot molds for safety!

## Casting
To make metal items, you should cast them into molds. Casting is done by following steps: put small ores into a vessel and heat them up. After that, open the vessel by right-clicking, and put the mold you want to cast. Alternatively, smelt those ores in charcoal forge, with a ingot mold or a vessel in it. Molten metal will automatically go into the containers.

The first material to make tools would be copper. There must have been some copper ores during the travel, in the form of native copper, tetrahedrite, or malachite. If you haven't find one, go find it.

There's an option to make bronze by alloying copper and tin. This will be covered later, but it is recommended to jump directly to the bronze age.

9 small ores(16mB) translate into 1 ingot/tool(144mB). You will need at least 14 copper ingots for a copper anvil, which is necessary for progression in the primitive age. Even if you start right away from bronze tools, this requirement will not be removed.

The first tool you should make is a saw. Don't make pickaxe! You cannot mine anything without a saw, because of the cave-ins. Moreover, it is better to mine materials with a hammer, which yields almost 7 times much.

## Flux
Flux is a material for welding in an anvil. It can be acquired by crafting stones with hammer, commonly claystone, marble**TODO**, and once-living organisms.

## Anvils
An anvil is a crafting station for forging and welding. Forging is for making tools, and welding is for making double ingots/plates or complex items. Welding recipe usually reuiqres flux. Every tool using better items than bronze must be made in the same or higher tier of anvil.

An anvil has a tier. Starting from stone, it goes along copper, (any) bronze, wrought iron, steel, black steel, and colored steel. Every anvil except for stone one requires 7 double ingots (or 14 ingots) to make, and every progression will involve crafting of new anvil in the primitive age.

To get your first anvil, grab a raw igneous extrusive rock. Raw rocks can be extracted by isolating the rock from any other nearby rocks. Place it down anywhere you want, and right click with a hammer. You now have a stone anvil!

Stone anvil unlocks double copper ingots. Heat up 14 copper ingots until it is able to be welded (Orange *** is recommended). Put two ingots and enough flux in anvil. Right-click the anvil with hammer while crouching, and you'll get a double copper ingot! Repeat this until you have 7 double copper ingots. Place them on crafting table in a I shape, and now you have the first metal anvil!

Everytime you get better materials in the primitive age, you will repeat these steps.

## Alloying Bronze
Simply put, alloying is mixing materials. Some materials require specific ratio of specific materials, and bronze is the first alloy you'll make. There are 3 kinds of bronze: plain bronze with copper and tin, bismuth bronze with copper, bismuth, and zinc, and balck bronze with copper, silver, and gold. As you proceed, you must make all the different bronzes.

In TerrafirmaGreg, the plain bronze will be the best option, which is just a mixture of copper and tin. The required raito of materials can be navigated in the alloying[^5] tab in JEI. More easily, just put some stacks of copper and tin in vessel and hover over it. If it says it forms bronze, heat the vessel in the way you did to copper. One pitfall is that a vessel has its maximum capacity of 3000 mB. Any material more than that will just vanish, so don't be greedy.

After alloying a bronze, cast 46 ingots, 14 for a new anvil, and 32 for a bloomery, which will be covered later. Smelt the previous copper anvil if you want to, noting that it takes ridiculously long time to do.

## Bloomery
It's time to proceed to the iron age, but it is a bit different from before. Because of  the too high amount of carbon, you must smelt them in a bloomery.

A bloomery is made up of 8 double bronze plates. Each plate costs 2 ingots, and each double plate costs 2 plates, so you need 32 bronze ingots to make one. It is a kind of multiblock, requiring at least 21 stone blocks. To form a bloomery, place down a block on which a bloomery door will be put, place one more block in the same y layer, 

[^1]: Colored steel refers to red/blue steel.
[^2]: It is equivalent to 23.48 sets(=64).
[^3]: At least until MV. I don't know further than MV.
[^4]: Those are: Athyrium, Canna, Goldenrod, Pampas Grass, Perovskia, and Water Canna.
[^5]: Not sure, but there exists
