# Single Block Boilers
A boiler is a machine which heats up water and produces steam. It will output its steam to the directly adjacent machines, with one output side in the back. A boiler can be either single block or multiblock. In this section, single block boilers will be mainly covered, partially because multiblock boilers require circuits.

Boilers can explode, if provided water when it is hot and has no water in it. When it explode, the boiler will be removed from the world. This applies to every steam boiler, including mutiblock one. To prevent this, always put water before you put any fuel. If you accidentally put any fuel in a boiler without water, just break it and replace it. This will reset its temperature down to 293K(~ 20C).

Single block boilers can be divided into two categories: pressure and source. In terms of pressure, there are two types of boilers: low pressure one and high pressure one. They just differ in the amount of steam production, with a minor efficiency cost that fuel in low pressure one will last shorter by half than high pressure one would do. So in most cases, using high pressure machines with a low pressure boiler has no problem, although it will use more steam than a low pressure boiler produces. Thankfully, a boiler has buffer to save some of the steam. Also, because all steam machines are high pressure machines, the pressure part in the name of a machine will be often omitted.

In terms of source, there are three types: solid, liquid, and solar boiler. A solid boiler uses fuel like charcoal, and liquid one uses creosote or lava to heat up the water. A solar boiler requires sunlight to run. Unlike solid fuel, liquid fuel can be renewed fairly easily, so most boiler would be a liquid one. Multiblock boilers can be configured to use any kind of fuel.