# The Mechanical-Steam Age
Welcome to the world of Create/Gregtech! You can finally start making some contraptions which will skip million years of human history.

You may notice this age is called the mechanical-steam age. It is because you have to progress in parallel. Your first Gregtech machine would have been coke oven, which gives you 1:1 ratio of charcoal. Other than that requires some kind of power generator, like a steam boiler. A low pressure steam boiler is the first possible power generator you can make. With some Gregtech machines, Create cogwheel gets unlocked. While cogwheels itself is not required, deployer is required for making the first circuits. Also, Create contraptions will be really helpful for the progression to LV, the first electornic age you will undergo.

The first rule of thumb from now on is to batch craft as much as possible. This is for preventing tragedy where you have not enough resources to do something. Most of the things in this game demand you to have things in the figure of 3 digits at minimum. It would be smart to just stockpile them, and not to try to make things on-demand. It may seem that wasting resources is much better than saving resources by making on-demand, partially because most of them will become infinite in the later game.

First of all, every machine (except for coke oven) requires some kind of power. In the mechanical-steam age, the source of power is steam, as you may expect. It is generated from boilers.

## Single Block Boilers
A boiler is a machine which heats up water and produces steam. It will output its steam to the directly adjacent machines, with one output side in the back. A boiler can be either single block or multiblock. In this section, single block boilers will be mainly covered, partially because multiblock boilers require circuits.

Boilers can explode, if provided water when it is hot and has no water in it. When it explode, the boiler will be removed from the world. This applies to every steam boiler, including mutiblock one. To prevent this, always put water before you put any fuel. If you accidentally put any fuel in a boiler without water, just break it and replace it. This will reset its temperature down to 293K(~ 20C).

Single block boilers can be divided into two categories: pressure and source. In terms of pressure, there are two types of boilers: low pressure one and high pressure one. They just differ in the amount of steam production, with a minor efficiency cost that fuel in low pressure one will last shorter by half than high pressure one would do. So in most cases, using high pressure machines with a low pressure boiler has no problem, although it will use more steam than a low pressure boiler produces. Thankfully, a boiler has buffer to save some of the steam. Also, because all steam machines are high pressure machines, the pressure part in the name of a machine will be often omitted.

In terms of source, there are three types: solid, liquid, and solar boiler. A solid boiler uses fuel like charcoal, and liquid one uses creosote or lava to heat up the water. A solar boiler requires sunlight to run. Unlike solid fuel, liquid fuel can be renewed fairly easily, so most boiler would be a liquid one. Multiblock boilers can be configured to use any kind of fuel.

## Fluid Pipes
Steam is carried with fluid pipes. 

## Mechanical Press
The first goal in here is to make a mechanical press. It cuts off the cost of making a plate almost by half: 1.1875 ingots per plate. It requires an iron block, which has to be made in a high pressure alloy smelter. So, the first Gregtech machine in the mechanical/steam age would be an alloy smelter. You can run it with a hand crank. Unless you live around a river, getting rotational power automatically would be pretty difficult. A mechanical press will (literally) press an item that is under the block. If its piston does not extend, check if the item is in the block right below. Disappointingly enough, it has a 20% chance of failure: it will give you back a small pile of dust, which accounts for 25% of an ingot.

The next thing you would want to do is divided into two objectives: making a cogwheel and increasing the effficiency of the blast furnace.

## Unlocking a Cogwheel
Making a cogwheel requires a macerator and a compressor, not to mention a coke oven. A macerator is a machine which crush things into dusts. It will macerate creosote-treated wood planks, which can be made from planks in a sealed barrel with creosote, into a treated wood pulp. A compressor will compress the pulp into a treated wood planks, which now can be used for cogwheels by crafting it with a shaft.

Cogwheel unlocks the full world of Create. Take a look at:
* Auto fuel/water suppliment: you don't want it to explode
* Kapok tree farm: you will need a TON of them, especially from MV
* Rolling mill: the cheapest rod recipe
* Mechanical saw: now we have 4 planks from 1 wood

With the macerator you've made, concider giving a look at ore processing.

## Upgrading a Blast Furnace
This is of making more fire bricks for the chimney. Unlike the recipe using fire clay, its recipe gets much cheaper, only requiring normal clay balls to get one. However, being cheaper does not mean it's easier; it is significantly complicated. Actually, this is the whole point of Gregtech: cheaper, more complicated. The change in fire brick recipe requires a steam furnace and a macerator. Fire brick is now made by smelting a compressed fire clay brick, which can be made by merging a brick dust and a clay dust in a crafting table, which can be acquired by macerating a clay brick block and a clay ball respectively. A compressor will reduce the cost of a clay brick block into 4 bricks.